feat: Introduce replicated and non-replicated execution modes (#306)
dfinity/interface-spec: spec/index.md

In the reply callback of a [inter-canister method call](#system-api-call), the argument refers to the response to that call. In reject callbacks, no argument is available.

### Replicated and Non-Replicated execution mode

> Canister methods can be executed either in *replicated* mode where the method runs on all subnet nodes and the results go through consensus or in *non-replicated* mode where the method runs on a single node and the result does not go through consensus. The trade-off between replicated and non-replicated mode is therefore one between speed of getting a result and trustworthiness of the result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Canister methods can be executed either in *replicated* mode where the method runs on all subnet nodes and the results go through consensus or in *non-replicated* mode where the method runs on a single node and the result does not go through consensus. The trade-off between replicated and non-replicated mode is therefore one between the result's latency and trustworthiness.
```

In the reply callback of a [inter-canister method call](#system-api-call), the argument refers to the response to that call. In reject callbacks, no argument is available.

### Replicated and Non-Replicated execution mode

> Canister methods can be executed either in *replicated mode* where the method runs on all subnet nodes and the results go through consensus or in *non-replicated mode* where the method runs on a single node and the result does not go through consensus. Update methods can only be run in replicated mode (as they need to preserve state changes) while composite query methods can only be executed in non-replicated mode. Query methods can be executed in either mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Canister methods can be executed either in *replicated mode* where the method runs on all subnet nodes and the results go through consensus or in *non-replicated mode* where the method runs on a single node and the result does not go through consensus. Update methods can only be run in replicated mode (as they need to preserve state changes) while composite query and inspect message methods can only be executed in non-replicated mode. Query methods can be executed in either mode.
```

Reviewer: On the other hand, we aren't pointing out all replicated mode methods either, so I'm not sure about this suggestion after all.

Author: I think we should figure out what we want to call out here. We can list all methods and whether they can be run in replicated or non-replicated mode. I started with something to have a discussion.

Author: I added a table with all canister methods and the mode that they can be executed in. Was there anything else we said we wanted to include?

Reviewer: We also discussed to include an overview of what changes get persisted in the individual cases, but we can also do that in a follow up MR to not block the improvement this MR already brings.

Author: Thanks for the reminder. I suggest we cover this in a follow up MR to unblock merging here.

    ic0.msg_reject_msg_size : () -> i32;                                        // Rt CRt
    ic0.msg_reject_msg_copy : (dst : i32, offset : i32, size : i32) -> ();      // Rt CRt

    ic0.msg_reply_data_append : (src : i32, size : i32) -> ();                  // U RQ NRQ CQ Ry Rt CRy CRt
    ic0.msg_reply : () -> ();                                                   // U RQ NRQ CQ Ry Rt CRy CRt
    ic0.msg_reject : (src : i32, size : i32) -> ();                             // U RQ NRQ CQ Ry Rt CRy CRt

    ic0.msg_cycles_available : () -> i64;                                       // U Rt Ry
    ic0.msg_cycles_available128 : (dst : i32) -> ();                            // U Rt Ry
    ic0.msg_cycles_refunded : () -> i64;                                        // Rt Ry
    ic0.msg_cycles_refunded128 : (dst : i32) -> ();                             // Rt Ry
    ic0.msg_cycles_accept : (max_amount : i64) -> (amount : i64);               // U RQ Rt Ry
    ic0.msg_cycles_accept128 : (max_amount_high : i64, max_amount_low: i64, dst : i32)
                           -> ();                                               // U RQ Rt Ry

>     ic0.cycles_burn128 : (amount_high : i64, amount_low : i64, dst : i32) -> ();               // I G U RQ Ry Rt C T

Author: No, not yet. First we agree on the spec PR and then we make the necessary changes.

>     ic0.cycles_burn128 : (amount_high : i64, amount_low : i64, dst : i32) -> ();               // I G U RQ Ry Rt C T

Author: My main goal was to allow canisters to accept cycles in replicated queries (which we discussed in the interface spec meeting last week). Then it felt like `ic0.cycles_burn128` could also be allowed in replicated queries and it would allow you to burn cycles, i.e. the cycles changes would indeed be committed to the replicated state.

Why do you think that would be confusing? It's certainly a change in behaviour but especially accepting cycles in replicated queries allows people to build reasonable business models for their callers by requiring payments for accessing endpoints.

>     ic0.cycles_burn128 : (amount_high : i64, amount_low : i64, dst : i32) -> ();               // I G U RQ Ry Rt C T

Reviewer: ok

>     ic0.cycles_burn128 : (amount_high : i64, amount_low : i64, dst : i32) -> ();               // I G U RQ Ry Rt C T

Author: As discussed during the meeting yesterday, I removed the changes to the cycles API to keep this PR only focused in formally introducing the two modes without changes in current behaviour.

    ic0.certified_data_set : (src: i32, size: i32) -> ();                       // I G U Ry Rt T
    ic0.data_certificate_present : () -> i32;                                   // *
    ic0.data_certificate_size : () -> i32;                                      // NRQ CQ
    ic0.data_certificate_copy : (dst: i32, offset: i32, size: i32) -> ();       // NRQ CQ

    ic0.time : () -> (timestamp : i64);                                         // *

>     ic0.global_timer_set : (timestamp : i64) -> i64;                            // I G U RQ Ry Rt C T

Reviewer: This isn't implemented yet, right?

Reviewer: Also it might have unexpected consequences as e.g., the Rust timers CDK needs to alter state when registering a new timer and these state changes will be rolled back in replicated query mode.

Author: No, and I was actually unsure whether we should do it. It just felt that there's no strong reason to disallow using this API in replicated queries but indeed it's not going to be usable by the Rust CDK so maybe we I revert this for now.

Author: Reverted this change.
